---
title: "A Balanced Approach to Concussion Prevention"
layout: post
category: Thoughts
tags: featured
author: ben
hero: /assets/heros/blog/pocket-collapse.jpg
summary: "Combining equipment improvements, educational efforts, safer playing styles, and trackable safety statistics to improve player safety."
---

With the Patriots’ exciting Super Bowl victory on the books, football season is coming to a close. But the impact that concussions have on countless lives doesn’t end with the season. Sports-related head impacts and concussions remain a big motivation for technological exploration, from [sensor products like ours](/) to the development of better safety equipment for players. With each new season, helmet manufacturers show off their newest technology for the media to breathlessly report as the newest “concussion blocking” helmet on the market. While this kind of attention is great for continuing to raise awareness of concussions in sports, today’s news cycle of clickbait headlines and Twitter-deep takes misses much of the important nuance of the issue, leading to dangerous misconceptions around the science of head impacts.

The idea of a “silver bullet” solution to the concussion problem is a tantalizing one, but  helmets can only do so much. While great progress has been made in improving helmets to effectively reduce the magnitude of smaller impacts, they are only effective at absorbing impacts up to a point. Ultimately, a helmet capable of absorbing the full force of a big impact (utilizing presently available technology) would be prohibitively unwieldy and an unrealistic solution without drastic changes to the nature of the games for which it is intended.

If you'll grant me the premise, we can model a head and helmet with some common household items. If your brain is a sponge inside of a water-filled tupperware container, then a helmet is an additional slightly larger tupperware container around the first one. Smack it, drop it, or throw it off a wall, and the outer container will take the brunt of the damage. Even as it dents or cracks, the inner container remains unharmed. This mirrors a helmet’s effectiveness at preventing bumps, bruises, contusions, and fractures on impact. But watch what the sponge does. It will still bounce around inside of its container, striking against its walls. This is a decent approximation of the mechanisms by which a brain is concussed.

Now consider simply shaking the whole thing without striking it against anything. The sponge still bounces around inside of its container. And this illustrates the greatest shortcoming of helmets -- the inability to mitigate head accelerations not due to direct impacts. There are countless ways for this to happen in typical gameplay. Take [this hit to Drew Brees](http://ftw.usatoday.com/2013/11/ahmad-brooks-drew-brees-gif) as a graphic example of how getting hit in the shoulder can be even worse than being hit in the head. The point being that even in the absence of a direct impact, your head and brain can still undergo dangerous acceleration events that are, short of wildly impractical equipment modifications, unavoidable. So it's clear that although helmets can help in some ways, they're far from the final solution in solving the concussion problem.

A comprehensive approach to head impacts in sports requires not just handling them as they happen, but also addressing the source of the impacts themselves. Despite the flack that the NFL has taken for their handling of player safety issues, they have instituted policies to modify player behavior that have had [a measureable effect](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/01/29/nfl-concussions-2014-season-2015_n_6573260.html) in reducing head injuries. And programs like [Heads Up Football](http://usafootball.com/headsup) are teaching a generation of young players to play with safety in mind, while giving parents and coaches the necessary education to look out for their kids. Small efforts, like rules changes aimed at protecting players and teaching players safer playing techniques, can make the greatest progress towards meaningful improvement in player safety, regardless of the presence of helmets.

The [Jolt Sensor](/) aims to be a part of this balanced approach to concussion prevention. By measuring and recording impacts as they happen, we can keep parents, coaches, and trainers more informed and aware -- not just during a single game or practice, but also over the course of seasons, years, and an athlete's entire life. And through real-time feedback to the athlete wearing the device, we can help them to be aware of how they are playing and guide behavioral changes to keep themselves and their opponents safer. Sports should make everyone happy and healthy. And we’re doing all we can to keep them that way.